    What Is Physical Fitness?
    3 Types of Physical Fitness
    5 Components of Fitness
    How to Work out Safely and Avoid Injury
    Want to Dive Deeper Into Your Wellness Journey?
    Joe Holder Teaches Fitness and Wellness Fundamentals

What Is Physical Fitness?

Physical fitness encompasses many factors, including body composition, flexibility, and endurance, but it boils down to having sufficient energy and physical strength to complete tasks. Maintaining physical fitness may contribute to a better quality of life, overall longevity, and lower blood pressure, in addition to potentially decreasing the risk of chronic diseases like heart disease and Type 2 diabetes.
Meet One of Your New Instructors
Sign Up
3 Types of Physical Fitness

Your body’s overall fitness consists of three parameters, and your fitness program should ideally reflect that (in addition to incorporating all of the major muscle groups) to help you achieve full-body fitness:

    1. Aerobic or cardiovascular fitness: Aerobic fitness is your body’s ability to pump oxygenated blood through your blood vessels, especially as you engage in activities that raise your heart rate for an extended period. If you’re able to perform cardio—like running, swimming, or biking—for long stretches, you have a high level of aerobic fitness.
    2. Muscle-strengthening or anaerobic fitness: Anaerobic fitness is how much work your muscles can take on (and for what length of time) without needing rest and is reflected in your total muscle mass. Strength training increases anaerobic fitness, so being able to bench press beyond your body weight or perform many squats in a row can indicate your anaerobic fitness level.
    3. Flexibility: Your muscles shorten after physical activity and exertion; flexibility measures how much stretch your muscles have. You can improve your flexibility through regular stretching and flexibility exercises like yoga. 

5 Components of Fitness

Holistic physical fitness breaks down along the following lines and incorporates many types of exercise to address all five components of physical fitness:

    1. Body composition: Body composition generally refers to your body’s overall fat content. While body mass index (BMI) is a rough indication of fitness in relation to body composition, it also leaves out many factors that contribute to overall physical health and wellness. Consider your body fat content as only one small part of your overall fitness.
    2. Cardiovascular or cardiorespiratory endurance: Cardiovascular endurance measures how long your body can sustain physically taxing aerobic exercise. For example, a sprinter who can run fast but only for a short period doesn’t necessarily have high cardiovascular endurance. They could, however, incorporate sprinting into an interval training routine that alternates sprinting with rest for a longer period; doing so would build up cardiovascular endurance.
    3. Flexibility: Your flexibility amounts to how close you can get to exercising a full range of motion for your muscles. The sit and reach test, in which you extend your legs straight in front of you and reach with both hands toward your toes, is a classic measure of flexibility.
    4. Muscular endurance: Muscular endurance is distinct from muscular strength because it’s a matter of how long your muscles can perform work without rest. For example, performing many sit-ups or push-ups indicates muscular endurance, whereas powerlifting with very heavy weights does not.
    5. Muscular strength: You can measure your muscular strength by the maximal force produced by a given muscle or muscle group. Incorporating a weight-training program with increasingly heavier weights into your fitness training can help you build up muscle strength over time. 

How to Work out Safely and Avoid Injury

If you have a previous or pre-existing health condition, consult your physician before beginning an exercise program. Proper exercise technique is essential to ensure the safety and effectiveness of an exercise program. Still, you may need to modify each exercise to attain optimal results based on your individual needs. Always select a weight that allows you to control your body throughout the movement completely. When performing any exercise, pay close attention to your body, and stop immediately if you note pain or discomfort.

To see continual progress and build body strength, incorporate proper warm-ups, rest, and nutrition into your exercise program. Your results will ultimately be based on your ability to recover from your workouts adequately. Rest for twenty-four to forty-eight hours before training the same muscle groups to allow sufficient recovery.
Want to Dive Deeper Into Your Wellness Journey?

Throw on some athleisure, fire up a MasterClass Annual Membership, and get ready to sweat it out with exclusive instructional videos from Nike Master Trainer and GQ fitness specialist Joe Holder. Want to improve your cardiovascular endurance? Give Joe’s HIIT workout a go. Trying to get a little swole? He’s got a strength training workout for that. From fitness tips to nutrition hacks, Joe will have you feeling healthier in no time.
our Wellness courses
Carol Dweck, David Yeager, Steve Young, Jeremy Bohannon, and Lorena Tareszkiewicz Seidel

With Leading Experts
Halle Berry, Dr. Judith Joseph, Dr. Emily Jacobs, Dr. Lori Brotto, and Dr. Jen Gunter

With Halle Berry and Leading Experts
Ryan Holiday

Ryan Holiday with Noted Experts
Dr. Wendy Suzuki, Dr. Lisa Feldman Barrett, Dr. Uma Naidoo, and Gregory Gourdet

Brain Health with Leading Experts
Popular Articles
How to Deep-Throat: 5 Tips for Deep-Throating
Electrolytes Explained: What Do Electrolytes Do?
Chair Pose in Yoga: 5 Benefits of Utkatasana
How to Do Tree Pose in Yoga: 3 Ways to Modify Tree Pose
Best Time to Meditate: Time of Day for Meditation Practice

Try some of our classes

Enter your email and we’ll send you some samples of our favorite classes.
Email

I agree to receive email updates

By clicking "Sign up with Google", "Sign up with Facebook" or by sharing your email, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

Featured MasterClass Instructor
Joe Holder

rom Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Physical fitness is achieved through exercise, among other factors. Photo shows Rich Froning Jr., four-time winner of "Fittest Man on Earth" title.

Physical fitness is a state of health and well-being and, more specifically, the ability to perform aspects of sports, occupations, and daily activities. Physical fitness is generally achieved through proper nutrition,[1] moderate-vigorous physical exercise,[2] and sufficient rest along with a formal recovery plan.[3]

Before the Industrial Revolution, fitness was defined as the capacity to carry out the day's activities without undue fatigue or lethargy. However, with automation and changes in lifestyles, physical fitness is now considered a measure of the body's ability to function efficiently and effectively in work and leisure activities, to be healthy, to resist hypokinetic diseases, to improve immune system function, and to meet emergency situations.[4]
Overview

Fitness is defined as the quality or state of being fit and healthy.[5] Around 1950, perhaps consistent with the Industrial Revolution and the treatise of World War II, the term "fitness" increased in western vernacular by a factor of ten.[6] The modern definition of fitness describes either a person or machine's ability to perform a specific function or a holistic definition of human adaptability to cope with various situations. This has led to an interrelation of human fitness and physical attractiveness that has mobilized global fitness and fitness equipment industries. Regarding specific function, fitness is attributed to persons who possess significant aerobic or anaerobic ability (i.e., endurance or strength). A well-rounded fitness program improves a person in all aspects of fitness compared to practicing only one, such as only cardio/respiratory or only weight training.

A comprehensive fitness program tailored to an individual typically focuses on one or more specific skills,[7] and on age-[8] or health-related needs such as bone health.[9] Many sources[10] also cite mental, social and emotional health as an important part of overall fitness. This is often presented in textbooks as a triangle made up of three points, which represent physical, emotional, and mental fitness. Physical fitness has been shown to have benefits in preventing ill health and assisting recovery from injury or illness. Along with the physical health benefits of fitness, it has also been shown to have a positive impact on mental health as well by assisting in treating anxiety and depression.[11] Physical fitness can also prevent or treat many other chronic health conditions brought on by unhealthy lifestyle or aging as well and has been listed frequently as one of the most popular and advantageous self-care therapies.[12] Working out can also help some people sleep better by building up sleeping pressure and possibly alleviate some mood disorders in certain individuals.[13]

Developing research has demonstrated that many of the benefits of exercise are mediated through the role of skeletal muscle as an endocrine organ. That is, contracting muscles release multiple substances known as myokines, which promote the growth of new tissue, tissue repair, and various anti-inflammatory functions, which in turn reduce the risk of developing various inflammatory diseases.[14]
Activity guidelines

The 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans were released by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to provide science-based guidance for people ages 3 years and older to improve their health by participating in regular physical activity. These guidelines recommend that all adults should move more and sit less throughout the day to improve health-related quality of life including mental, emotional, and physical health. For substantial health benefits, adults should perform at least 150 to 300 minutes of moderate-intensity, or 75 to 150 minutes per week of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity, or an equivalent combination of both spread throughout the week.[15] The recommendation for physical activity to occur in bouts of at least 10 minutes has been eliminated, as new research suggests that bouts of any length contribute to the health benefits linked to the accumulated volume of physical activity. Additional health benefits may be achieved by engaging in more than 300 minutes (5 hours) of moderate-intensity physical activity per week. Adults should also do muscle-strengthening activities that are of moderate or greater intensity and involve all major muscle groups on two or more days a week, as these activities provide additional health benefits.[16]

Guidelines in the United Kingdom released in July 2011 include the following points: The intensity at which a person exercises is key, and light activity such as strolling and house work is unlikely to have much positive impact on the health of most people. For aerobic exercise to be beneficial, it must raise the heart rate and cause perspiration. A person should do a minimum of 150 minutes a week of moderate-intensity aerobic exercise. There are more health benefits gained if a person exercises beyond 150 minutes. Sedentary time (time spent not standing, such as when on a chair or in bed) is bad for a person's health, and no amount of exercise can negate the effects of sitting for too long. These guidelines are now much more in line with those used in the U.S., which also includes recommendations for muscle-building and bone-strengthening activities such as lifting weights and yoga.[17]
Exercise
Main article: Exercise
Aerobic exercise
Playing sports such as lawn tennis is a common way to maintain/improve physical fitness. Image shows international tennis player Barbora Strýcová.

Cardiorespiratory fitness can be measured using VO2 max, a measure of the amount of oxygen the body can uptake and utilize.[18][19] Aerobic exercise, which improves cardiorespiratory fitness and increase stamina, involves movement that increases the heart rate to improve the body's oxygen consumption. This form of exercise is an important part of all training regiments, whether for professional athletes or for the everyday person.[20]

Prominent examples of aerobic exercises include:

    Jogging – Running at a steady and gentle pace. This form of exercise is great for maintaining weight and building a cardiovascular base to later perform more intense exercises.
    Working on elliptical trainer – This is a stationary exercise machine used to perform walking, or running without causing excessive stress on the joints. This form of exercise is perfect for people with achy hips, knees, and ankles.
    Walking – Moving at a fairly regular pace for a short, medium or long distance.
    Treadmill training – Many treadmills have programs set up that offer numerous different workout plans. One effective cardiovascular activity would be to switch between running and walking. Typically warm up first by walking and then switch off between walking for three minutes and running for three minutes.
    Swimming – Using the arms and legs to keep oneself afloat in water and moving either forwards or backward. This is a good full-body exercise for those who are looking to strengthen their core while improving cardiovascular endurance.
    Cycling – Riding a bicycle typically involves longer distances than walking or jogging. This is another low-impact exercise on the joints and is great for improving leg strength.[21]

Anaerobic exercise
Main article: Anaerobic exercise
A man and a woman doing weight training at a health club

Anaerobic exercise features high-intensity movements performed in a short period of time. It is a fast, high-intensity exercise that does not require the body to utilize oxygen to produce energy. It helps to promote strength, endurance, speed, and power; and is used by bodybuilders to build workout intensity. Anaerobic exercises are thought to increase the metabolic rate, thereby allowing one to burn additional calories as the body recovers from exercise due to an increase in body temperature and excess post-exercise oxygen consumption (EPOC) after the exercise ended.

Prominent examples of anaerobic exercises include:

    Weight training – A common type of strength training for developing the strength and size of skeletal muscles.
    Isometric exercise – Helps to maintain strength. A muscle action in which no visible movement occurs and the resistance matches the muscular tension.[22]
    Sprinting – Running short distances as fast as possible, training for muscle explosiveness.[23]
    Interval training – Alternating short bursts (lasting around 30 seconds) of intense activity with longer intervals (three to four minutes) of less intense activity. This type of activity also builds speed and endurance.[24]

Training

Specific or task-oriented fitness is a person's ability to perform in a specific activity, such as sports or military service, with a reasonable efficiency. Specific training prepares athletes to perform well in their sport. These include, among others:
Swimmers in competitive swimwear perform squats prior to entering the pool in a U.S. military base, 2011.

    100 m sprint: In a sprint, the athlete must be trained to work anaerobically throughout the race, an example of how to do this would be interval training.
    Century ride: Cyclists must be prepared aerobically for a bike ride of 100 miles or more.
    Middle distance running: Athletes require both speed and endurance to gain benefit out of this training. The hard-working muscles are at their peak for a longer period of time as they are being used at that level for the longer period of time.[25]
    Marathon: In this case, the athlete must be trained to work aerobically, and their endurance must be built-up to a maximum.
    Many firefighters and police officers undergo regular fitness testing to determine if they are capable of the physically demanding tasks required of the job.[26]
    Members of armed forces are often required to pass a formal fitness test. For example, soldiers of the U.S. Army must be able to pass the Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT).[27]
    Hill sprints: Requires a high level of fitness to begin with; the exercise is particularly good for the leg muscles. The Army often trains to do mountain climbing and races.
    Plyometric and isometric exercises: An excellent way to build strength and increase muscular endurance.
    Sand running creates less strain on leg muscles than running on grass or concrete. This is because sand collapses beneath the foot, which softens the landing. Sand training is an effective way to lose weight and become fit, as more effort is needed (one and a half times more) to run on the soft sand than on a hard surface.[28]
    Aquajogging is a form of exercise that decreases strain on joints and bones.[29] The water supplies minimal impact[clarification needed] to muscles and bones, which is good for those recovering from injury. Furthermore, the resistance of the water as one jogs through it provides an enhanced effect of exercise (the deeper you are, the greater the force needed to pull your leg through).[30]
    Swimming: Squatting exercise helps in enhancing a swimmer's start.[31]

For physical fitness activity to benefit an individual, the exertion must trigger a sufficient amount of stimuli. Exercise with the correct amount of intensity, duration, and frequency can produce a significant amount of improvement. The person may overall feel better, but the physical effects on the human body take weeks or months to notice—and possibly years for full development. For training purposes, exercise must provide a stress or demand on either a function or tissue. To continue improvements, this demand must eventually increase little over an extended period of time. This sort of exercise training has three basic principles: overload, specificity, and progression. These principles are related to health but also enhancement of physical working capacity.[32]
High intensity interval training
Main article: High-intensity interval training
A man and a woman participating in high intensity events during a fitness competition

High-intensity interval training (HIIT) consists of repeated, short bursts of exercise, completed at a high level of intensity. These sets of intense activity are followed by a predetermined time of rest or low-intensity activity.[33] Studies have shown that exercising at a higher intensity can have the effect of increasing cardiac benefits for humans when compared with exercising at a low or moderate level.[34] When one's workout consists of a HIIT session, their body has to work harder to replace the oxygen it lost. Research into the benefits of HIIT have shown that it can be very successful for reducing fat, especially around the abdominal region.[35] Furthermore, when compared to continuous moderate exercise, HIIT proves to burn more calories and increase the amount of fat burned post- HIIT session.[36] Lack of time is one of the main reasons stated for not exercising; HIIT is a great alternative for those people because the duration of a HIIT session can be as short as 10 minutes, making it much quicker than conventional workouts.[37]
Effects
Main article: Exercise physiology
Controlling blood pressure

Physical fitness has been proven to support the body's blood pressure. Staying active and exercising regularly builds a stronger heart. The heart is the main organ in charge of systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure. Engaging in a physical activity raises blood pressure. Once the subject stops the activity, the blood pressure returns to normal. The more physical activity, the easier this process becomes, resulting in a fitter cardiovascular profile.[38] Through regular physical fitness, it becomes easier to create a rise in blood pressure. This lowers the force on the arteries, and lowers the overall blood pressure.[39]
Cancer prevention

Centers for disease control and prevention provide lifestyle guidelines for maintaining a balanced diet and engaging in physical activity to reduce the risk of disease. The WCRF/ American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR) published a list of recommendations that reflect the dietary and exercise behaviors which are proven to reduce incidence of cancer.

The WCRF/AICR recommendations include the following:

    Be as lean as possible without becoming underweight.
    Each week, adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity physical activity.
    Children should engage in at least one hour of moderate or vigorous physical activity each week.
    Be physically active for at least thirty minutes every day.
    Avoid sugar, and limit the consumption of energy-packed foods.
    Balance one's diet with a variety of vegetables, grains, fruits, legumes, etc.
    Limit sodium intake and the consumption of red meats and processed meats.
    Limit alcoholic drinks to two for men and one for women a day.[40]

These recommendations are also widely supported by the American Cancer Society. The guidelines have been evaluated and individuals who have higher guideline adherence scores have substantially reduced cancer risk as well as improved outcomes of a multitude of chronic health problems. Regular physical activity is a factor that helps reduce an individual's blood pressure and improves cholesterol levels, two key components that correlate with heart disease and type 2 diabetes.[41] The American Cancer Society encourages the public to "adopt a physically active lifestyle" by meeting the criteria in a variety of physical activities such as hiking, swimming, circuit training, resistance training, lifting, etc. It is understood that cancer is not a disease that can be cured by physical fitness alone, however, because it is a multifactorial disease, physical fitness is a controllable prevention. The large associations between physical fitness and reduced cancer risk are enough to provide a strategy of preventative interventions.[40] The American Cancer Society asserts different levels of activity ranging from moderate to vigorous to clarify the recommended time spent on a physical activity. These classifications of physical activity consider intentional exercise and basic activities performed on a daily basis and give the public a greater understanding of what fitness levels suffice as future disease prevention.
Inflammation

Studies have shown an association between increased physical activity and reduced inflammation.[42] It produces both a short-term inflammatory response and a long-term anti-inflammatory effect.[43] Physical activity reduces inflammation in conjunction with or independent of changes in body weight.[44] However, the mechanisms linking physical activity to inflammation are unknown.
Immune system

Physical activity boosts the immune system. This is dependent on the concentration of endogenous factors (such as sex hormones, metabolic hormones and growth hormones), body temperature, blood flow, hydration status and body position.[45] Physical activity has been shown to increase the levels of natural killer (NK) cells, NK T cells, macrophages, neutrophils and eosinophils, complements, cytokines, antibodies and T cytotoxic cells.[46][47] However, the mechanism linking physical activity to immune system is not fully understood.
Weight control
Main article: Weight control
See also: Healthy diet

Achieving resilience through physical fitness promotes a vast and complex range of health-related benefits. Individuals who keep up physical fitness levels generally regulate their distribution of body fat and prevent obesity. Studies prove that running uses calories in the body that come from the macronutrients eaten daily. In order for the body to be able to run, it will use those ingested calories, therefore it will burn calories.[48] Abdominal fat, specifically visceral fat, is most directly affected by engaging in aerobic exercise. Strength training has been known to increase the amount of muscle in the body, however, it can also reduce body fat.[49] Sex steroid hormones, insulin, and appropriate immune responses are factors that mediate metabolism in relation to abdominal fat. Therefore, physical fitness provides weight control through regulation of these bodily functions.[50]
Menopause and physical fitness

Menopause is often said to have occurred when a woman has had no vaginal bleeding for over a year since her last menstrual cycle. There are a number of symptoms connected to menopause, most of which can affect the quality of life of a woman involved in this stage of her life. One way to reduce the severity of the symptoms is to exercise and keep a healthy level of fitness. Prior to and during menopause, as the female body changes, there can be physical, physiological or internal changes to the body. These changes can be reduced or even prevented with regular exercise. These changes include:[51]

    Preventing weight gain: around menopause women tend to experience a reduction in muscle mass and an increase in fat levels. Increasing the amount of physical exercise undertaken can help to prevent these changes.
    Reducing the risk of breast cancer: weight loss from regular exercise may offer protection from breast cancer.
    Strengthening bones: physical activity can slow the bone loss associated with menopause, reducing the chance of bone fractures and osteoporosis.
    Reducing the risk of disease: excess weight can increase the risk of heart disease and type 2 diabetes, and regular physical activity can counter these effects.
    Boosting mood: being involved in regular activities can improve psychological health, an effect that can be seen at any age and not just during or after menopause.[52]

The Melbourne Women's Midlife Health Project followed 438 women over an eight-year period providing evidence showing that even though physical activity was not associated with vasomotor symptoms (more commonly known as hot flashes) in this cohort at the beginning, women who reported they were physically active every day at the beginning were 49% less likely to have reported bothersome hot flushes. This is in contrast to women whose level of activity decreased and were more likely to experience bothersome hot flushes.[53]
Mental health
Main article: Neurobiological effects of physical exercise
See also: Mental health § Physical activity

Studies have shown that physical activity can improve mental health and well-being.[54][55] This improvement is due to an increase in blood flow to the brain, allowing for the release of hormones as well as a decrease of stress hormone levels in the body (e.g., cortisol, adrenaline) while also stimulating the human body's mood boosters and natural painkillers.[56] Not only does exercise release these feel-good hormones, it can also help relieve stress and help build confidence.[57] The same way exercising can help humans to have a healthier life, it also can improve sleep quality. Based on studies, even 10 minutes of exercise per day can help insomnia.[58] These trends improve as physical activity is performed on a consistent basis, which makes exercise effective in relieving symptoms of depression and anxiety, positively impacting mental health and bringing about several other benefits. For example:[59]

    Physical activity has been linked to the alleviation of depression and anxiety symptoms.[54]
    In patients with schizophrenia, physical fitness has been shown to improve their quality of life and decrease the effects of schizophrenia.[60]
    Being fit can improve one's self-esteem.
    Working out can improve one's mental alertness and it can reduce fatigue.
    Studies[which?] have shown a reduction in stress levels.[citation needed]
    Increased opportunity for social interaction, allowing for improved social skills[59]

To achieve some of these benefits, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests at least 30–60 minutes of exercise 3-5 times a week.[61]

    Different forms of exercise have been proven to improve mental health and reduce the risk of depression, anxiety, and suicide.
    Benefits of Exercise on Mental health include ... Improved sleep, Stress relief, Improvement in mood, Increased energy and stamina, Reduced tiredness that can increase mental alertness. There are beneficial effects for mental health as well as physical health when it comes to exercise.[62]

History
See also: History of physical training and fitness
Ladies performing a common 19th-century fitness routine including climbing the underside of a ladder, balancing and gymnastics

In the 1940s, an emigrant M.D. from Austria named Hans Kraus began testing children in the U.S. and Europe for what he termed, "Muscular Fitness." (in other words, muscular functionality) Through his testing, he found children in the U.S. to be far less physically capable than European children. Kraus published some alarming papers in various journals and got the attention of some powerful people, including a senator from Pennsylvania who took the findings to President Dwight D. Eisenhower. President Eisenhower was "shocked." He set up a series of conferences and committees; then in July 1956, Eisenhower established the President's Council on Youth Fitness.

In Greece, physical fitness was considered to be an essential component of a healthy life and it was the norm for men to frequent a gymnasium. Physical fitness regimes were also considered to be of paramount importance in a nation's ability to train soldiers for an effective military force. Partly for these reasons, organized fitness regimes have been in existence throughout known history and evidence of them can be found in many countries.

Gymnasiums which would seem familiar today began to become increasingly common in the 19th century. The industrial revolution had led to a more sedentary lifestyle for many people and there was an increased awareness that this had the potential to be harmful to health. This was a key motivating factor for the forming of a physical culture movement, especially in Europe and the USA. This movement advocated increased levels of physical fitness for men, women, and children and sought to do so through various forms of indoor and outdoor activity, and education. In many ways, it laid the foundations for modern fitness culture.[63]
Education
See also: Physical education

The following is a list of some institutions that educate people about physical fitness:

    American Council on Exercise (ACE)
    National Academy of Sports Medicine (NASM)
    International Sports Science Association (ISSA)


 Overview

A lifestyle with good nutrition, regular physical activity, and stress management supports a healthy weight. People who lose weight at a gradual, steady pace—about 1 to 2 pounds a week—are more likely to keep the weight off than people who lose weight quickly.

Factors, such as sleep, medicines, medical conditions, and age can also affect weight management. If you're concerned about your weight or have questions about your medicines, talk with your health care provider.

If you are ready to get started, here are 5 steps.
Step 1: Make a commitment

Whether you have a family history of heart disease or want to feel better in your clothes, write down why you want to lose weight. Writing it down can confirm your commitment. Post your reasons in a place where they can be a daily reminder of why you want to make this change.
Even Modest Weight Loss Helps‎
Even modest weight loss can improve blood pressure, cholesterol, and blood sugar levels. For example, a 5% weight reduction for a person who weighs 200 pounds is 10 pounds. This change could lower the risk for some chronic diseases.
Step 2: Take stock of where you are

Write down everything you consume for a few days in a food and beverage diary. Being more aware of what you eat and drink will help you avoid mindless consumption. Tracking physical activity, sleep, and emotions can also help you understand current habits and stressors. This can also help identify areas to start making changes.

Next, examine your lifestyle. Identify things that might pose challenges to your weight loss efforts. For example:

    Does your work schedule make it hard to be physically active?
    Do you eat sugary foods because that's what you buy for your kids?
    Do your coworkers bring high-calorie items, such as doughnuts, to the workplace?

Think through things you can do to help overcome these challenges.

If you have a chronic condition or a disability, ask your health care provider for resources to support a healthy weight. This may include referral to a registered dietitian, clinical or community programs, federally approved medications or devices, or surgery. Ask for a follow-up appointment to monitor changes in your weight or any related health conditions.
Step 3: Set realistic goals

Set short-term goals and reward your efforts along the way. Maybe your long-term goal is to lose 40 pounds and to control your high blood pressure. Short-term goals might include drinking water instead of sugary beverages, taking a 15-minute evening walk, or having a vegetable with supper.

Focus on two or three goals at a time. Effective goals are:

    Specific
    Realistic
    Forgiving (less than perfect)

For example, "exercise more" is not specific. But "I will walk 15 minutes, 3 days a week for the first week," is specific and realistic.

Setting unrealistic goals, such as losing 20 pounds in 2 weeks, can leave you feeling defeated and frustrated.

Being realistic also means expecting occasional setbacks. When setbacks happen, get back on track as quickly as possible. Think about how to prevent setbacks in similar future situations.

Everyone is different. What works for someone else might not be right for you. To help you find what works for you, try a variety of activities, such as walking, swimming, tennis, or group exercise classes. See what you enjoy most and can fit into your life. These activities will be easier to stick with over the long term.
Step 4: Identify resources for information and support

Identify family members or friends who will support your weight loss efforts. Coworkers or neighbors with similar goals might share healthy recipes and plan group physical activities. It may help to join a weight-loss program or visit a health care professional, such as a nutrition or weight-loss specialist.
Step 5: Continually monitor your progress

Revisit your goals from Step 3 and evaluate your progress regularly. Decide which parts of your plan are working well and which parts need to be changed. Use this information to revise your goals and plan.

If you consistently meet a particular goal, add a new goal to help continue your pathway to success.

Reward yourself for your achievements! Recognize when you're meeting your goals and be proud of your progress. Use non-food rewards, such as a bouquet of fresh flowers, a sports outing with friends, or a relaxing bath. Rewards help keep you motivated on the path to better health.
Resources

Treatment for overweight and obesity
Health care professionals can help you adopt lifestyle changes that may help you lose excess weight safely and keep it off over the long term.

Choosing a safe and successful weight-loss program
How to choose a program that may help you lose weight safely and keep it off over time.

Prescription medications to treat overweight and obesity
Combined with lifestyle and behavior changes, prescription medications help some people lose weight and maintain weight loss.

Bariatric surgery
Weight-loss surgery, also known as bariatric surgery, is an operation that makes changes to the digestive system.

Body image
Creating a positive body image through healthy eating habits.

Strategies for success
Find resources to help you lose or gain weight safely and effectively.

Weight management for youth
Address weight issues in children and teens with healthy guidelines, links to interactive and skill-building tools, and other resources.

What you should know about popular diets
How to evaluate claims made by weight-loss products and diets. Find information to choose weight-loss strategies that are healthy, effective, and safe for you.


